# Help for the function [<i>fiber_smoother</i>](https://github.com/bdamon/MuscleDTI_Toolbox/blob/master/Tractography-Functions/fiber_smoother.m), v. 1.4.0

## Introduction

This help file contains information about
1) [Purpose of the Program](https://github.com/bdamon/MuscleDTI_Toolbox/blob/master/Help/Current Functions/Help-for-fiber_smoother.md#1-Purpose)
2) [Usage of the Program](https://github.com/bdamon/MuscleDTI_Toolbox/blob/master/Help/Current Functions/Help-for-fiber_smoother.md#2-Usage)
3) [Syntax](https://github.com/bdamon/MuscleDTI_Toolbox/blob/master/Help/Current Functions/Help-for-fiber_smoother.md#3-Syntax)
4) [Example Code](https://github.com/bdamon/MuscleDTI_Toolbox/blob/master/Help/Current Functions/Help-for-fiber_smoother.md#4-Example-Code)
5) [Acknowledgements](https://github.com/bdamon/MuscleDTI_Toolbox/blob/master/Help/Current Functions/Help-for-fiber_smoother.md#5-Acknowledgements)

## 1. Purpose
The function <i>fiber_smoother</i> is used to smooth and increase the spatial resolution along fiber tracts by performing a polynomial fit. 

## 2. Usage

The user inputs the fiber tracts generated by [<i>fiber_track</i>](https://github.com/bdamon/MuscleDTI_Toolbox/blob/master/Help/Current Functions/Help-for-fiber_track.md) and a structure with options for implementing the polynomial fitting routines.  The [row column slice] positions are separately fitted to N<sup>th</sup>-order polynomials as functions of voxel-distance along the tract. The user selects the polynomial order separately for the row, column, and slice positions. The function returns the smoothed fiber tracts and matrices containing the polynomial coefficients for each point. 

To improve fitting and ensure that the fitted tract continues to originate from the seed point, the seed point is subtracted from the fiber tract prior to fitting. Then the <i>polyfitweighted</i> function is used to fit the remaining row, column, and slice positions to polynomial functions. A weight can be added to the seed point to improve the accuracy of the smoothing scheme. Finally, the <i>polyval</i> function is used to solve the polynomials at interpolation distances of interpolation_step. Tracts with a number of points lower than 2-times-the-maximum-polynomial-order are eliminated prior to smoothing.

This procedure is modified from [previous work](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22503094/) to: 
1) Fit the tract positions as functions of distance rather than point number, as required for tracking algorithms that use variable step sizes, such as FACT;
2) Allow user selection of the polynomial order, including different polynomial orders for the row/column/slice positions;
3) Allow user to use a weighted polynomial fitting scheme by adding a weight to the seed point, improving the accuracy of the smoothing scheme;
4) Ensure compatibility with new fiber_all matrix sizes to correspond to new seeding options.


## 3. Syntax
[smoothed_fiber_all, pcoeff_r, pcoeff_c, pcoeff_s, n_points_fitted] = fiber_smoother(fiber_all, fs_options);

### Input Arguments

* <i>fiber_all</i>: The original fiber tracts, output from fiber_track. The rows and columns correspond to locations on the roi_mesh, if aponeurosis-based seeding is used, or are placeholders for compatibility otherwise. Dimension 3 gives point numbers on the tract, and the fourth dimension has row, column, and slice coordinates, with units of voxels.

* <i>fs_options</i>: A structure containing the following fields:

   <i>. dwi_res: a three element vector with the FOV, (assumed to be the same for the x and y directions), in-plane matrix size, and the slice thickness of the DTI images. The FOV and slice thickness must be specified in mm.

  <i>.interpolation_step</i>: An interpolation interval for the fitted fiber tract, in units of pixel-widths.  For example, setting interpolation_step to 0.25 would interpolate the fiber tract at intervals of 0.25 pixel-widths.

   <i>.p_order</i></i>: A three-element vector containing the polynomial orders N<sub>R</sub>, N<sub>C</sub>, and N<sub>S</sub> to use when fitting the tracts; they should be specified in the sequence row-column-slice.
  
  <i>.tract_units: A two-element string variable set to 'vx' if the units of the fiber tracts are voxels and set to 'mm' if the fiber tracts have units of mm. If set to 'vx', the fiber tract coordinates are converted to units of mm prior to quantification.
  
  <i>.seed_point_weight: A scalar that specifies the weight given to the seed point in the polynomial fitting, default = 1 (no weights applied to the fitting scheme. A weight of 20 is recommended to improve the accuracy of the scheme when smoothing noisy fiber tracts.

### Output Arguments

* <i>smoothed_fiber_all: the fiber tracts following Nth order polynomial fitting
  
* <i>fiber_all_mm: the original fiber tracts in units of mm
  
* <i>smoothed_fiber_all_mm: the fiber tracts following Nth order polynomial fitting, in units of mm
  
* <i>pcoeff_r: a matrix of the Nth order polynomial coefficients for the tracts' row positions
  
* <i>pcoeff_c: a matrix of the Nth order polynomial coefficients for the tracts'column positions
  
* <i>pcoeff_s: a matrix of the Nth order polynomial coefficients for the tracts' slice positions
  
* <i>n_points_smoothed: the number of points in the fitted tracts
  
* <i>residuals: matrix of size rows (i.e. number of seedpoint rows) by columns by the maximum-number-of-tract-points by 5. The fourth dimension contains the row, column, and slice polynomial fit residuals (i.e. residuals(row,col,:,1) is the row residuals, etc.), the point number at which the polynomial was evaluated, and the percent-of-tract-length at which the polynomial was evaluated.
  
* <i>residuals_mm: matrix of size rows (i.e. number of seedpoint rows) by columns by the maximum-number-of-tract-points by 5. The fourth dimension contains the row, column, and slice polynomial fit residuals in units of mm, the point number at which the polynomial was evaluated, and the percent-of-tract-length at which the polynomial was evaluated.
  


## 4. Example Code
Given:

1.	An anatomical image with variable name anat_image and having matrix size 192x192x44, field of view 192x192 mm, and slice thickness 7 mm;

2.	The aponeurosis mesh stored in a variable called roi_mesh; 

3.	DTI images having matrix size 192x192x44, field of view 192x192 mm, and slice thickness 7 mm; and

4.	The fiber tracts generated by fiber_track 

the following code will allow the user to 

1.	Smooth the fiber tracts using 3rd, 3rd, and 2nd order polynomials for the row, column, and slice directions, respectively; and

2.	Visualize the outcome, with the mesh displayed in gray and the fiber tracts displayed in red.

% Set smoothing options

fs_options.interpolation_step = 0.5;

fs_options.p_order = [3 3 2];
 
% Call the function:

[smoothed_fiber_all, pcoeff_r, pcoeff_c, pcoeff_s, n_points_fitter] = fiber_smoother(fiber_all, fs_options);

%Visualize the outcome:

plot_options.plot_mesh = 1; %do plot the aponeurosis mesh

plot_options.plot_mask = 0; %don't plot the mask

plot_options.plot_fibers = 1; %do plot the fibers

plot_options.anat_dims = [192 7]; %FOV and slice thickness of the images to be displayed, in mm

plot_options.anat_slices = 14:10:44; %display image volume slices 14, 24, 34, and 44 

plot_options.mesh_size = [192 192]; %in-plane matrix size of the images used to create the mesh

plot_options.mesh_dims = [192 7]; %FOV and slice thickness of the images used to create the mesh, in mm

plot_options.mesh_color = [.75 .75 .75]; %make the mesh light gray

plot_options.fiber_color = [.8 .2 .2];

plot_options.dti_size = [192 192];

plot_options.dti_dims= [192 7];

smoothed_fiber_figure = fiber_visualizer(anat_image, plot_options, roi_mesh, mask, smoothed_fiber_all);


## 5. Acknowledgements
Zhaohua Ding, Anneriet Heemskerk, Carly Lockard, Xingyu Zhou, Roberto Pineda Guzman

Grant support: NIH/NIAMS R01 AR050101, NIH/NIAMS R01 AR073831


